for joining me live is sari Bashi the
program director at Human Rights Watch
she is also the co-founder of gisha and
is R organization that promotes
Palestinians right to freedom of
movement in Gaza thank you so much for
joining us here uh for this NewsHour I
mean just running through everything
that is happening inside Gaza at this
point in time how would you descri you
describe how this crisis is
unfolding I think what's so tragic about
the last two weeks is the way in which
civilians have been targeted and basic
rules about protecting civilians that
are accepted under the laws of war have
been flouted the latest Salvo in in this
round of violence was October 7th when
Hamas Le Fighters massacred Israeli
civilians and took others hostage in the
worst civilian massacre in Israeli
history Hamas needs to release all
civilian
hostages the fact that Hamas Fighters
committed war crimes against Israeli
civilians does not not justify the
Israeli authorities committing war
crimes against Palestinian civilians and
that is what we are seeing right now the
the refusal to allow Aid into Gaza is a
war crime it's collectively punishing
civilians for the actions of Fighters
and because nearly half of the people in
Gaza are children it's collectively
punishing children for the actions of
adult Fighters and as we see that day
after day they keep getting away with it
there's they're not being helped held to
account at this point in time are
they I think we need to be very specific
about what the international communities
demands should be from each party Hamas
need and other groups need to
immediately release all civilians and
countries like katar and Tura who have
influence with Hamas should press for
their immediate and unconditional
release countries like the United States
Europe and other backers of of the
Israeli government who are also arming
Israel
need to immediately demand that the
Israeli government restore water and
electricity to the Gaza Strip there's no
security reason not to turn the Taps
back on and allow fuel including through
the ru Crossing with uh with Egypt
without fuel the hospitals can power
their generators sewage plants uh water
water pumping stations cannot operate we
also need to require the Israeli
government to open its own Crossings
with Gaza for humanitarian assistance as
brutal as previous Wars have been in
previous Wars the Israeli government has
found ways to open its Crossings with
Gaza in order to allow in humanitarian
Aid and that's what needs to happen
right now yeah just on the fuel uh point
it sounds like hospitals could run out
as soon as Thursday um to fuel their
generators there one thing I want to
clarify it's not just about getting Aid
through the borders though is it because
Israel actually controls the power and
the water that is running into Gaza and
they could if they chose to turn it on
at any
point yes they could and they should
flick the switch back on we know that
the electricity grid has been badly
damaged but we think some lines are
functioning particularly in southern
Gaza some of the water lines are
functioning and there is some ability in
Northern Gaza they need to turn that
back on the Israeli government developed
gaza's infrastructure to depend on
supplies from Israel including its
drinkable water and most of its
electricity that needs to be done
immediately yeah as we saw a couple of
days ago when the summit was being held
in Cairo with many of the world leaders
uh gathered around that table I mean
many of them not all of them though were
calling for a humanitarian ceasefire but
really without the United States putting
pressure direct pressure on Israel to do
it there's really little hope that
that's actually going to
happen my concern is that the United
States government has been extremely
active in this particular conflict and
brokered a deal to allow very limited
amounts of Aid into rafle Crossing but
they didn't ask for things that are very
very basic like the Israeli government
restoring water and electricity red
lines are being crossed this is the
first time in the history of its
conflicts with Gaza that the Israeli
government has cut off water water for
children in Gaza this it needs to be
very clear and very specific Israel
needs to open up the water and
electricity to allow people some modom
of relief and the aid that the limited
Aid that's being allowed into Southern
Gaza is not responsive to the needs of
people in Northern Gaza it's almost
impossible to get Aid up to Northern
Gaza and I'm worried that the Israeli
government is abandoning its
responsibilities to civilians in
Northern Gaza it has told them to leave
repeatedly and according to the UN it
dropped leaflets yesterday telling them
in Arabic that if they stay they they're
likely to be considered part of
terrorist groups that is a flouting of
international law under international
law civilians retain their protections
whether or not they choose or are able
to comply with evacuation orders and I
want to remind us that in the so-called
evacuation zone is gaza's main shifa
hospital with thousands of patients
including people who cannot move okay
thank you so much for for laying out
just how dire the situation is in Gaza
at this point in time that is sorry
about the program director of uh at
Human Rights
Watch thank you